---
title:  "Everything I Know About Economics I Learned From World of Warcraft"
date:   "2025-03-10T00:00:00Z"
---

World of Warcraft is an MMO. Really, it's <i>the</i> MMO. It's been
running for a long time and has been very lucrative for Blizzard
Entertainment.

It's also taught me a lot about economics. Through World of Warcraft,
I learned that basic economics is actually a very practical
discipline. I wanted to use the game as a way to frame some lessons
I've learned about economics and how they apply to the game.

This is the first post in what will be a series. 

## Opportunity Cost: Why It's Not Cheaper To Gather Your Own Materials

Recently, in a version of WoW Classic I've been playing, I failed to
keep my professions in line with my level. Even though I was level 60
-- the max level in Classic -- I was unable to gather herbs or skin
creatures that were outside of those you'd find in the zones at the
very beginning of the game. I was a level 60/60 druid with level 5/350
professions.

I decided to pick up the Leatherworking profession, which would let me
craft some useful items out of raw materials. Leatherworking, however,
requires leather, which can only be acquired by taking the Skinning
profession and skinning the corpses of the monsters you kill. Instead
of picking up Skinning, I just got Leatherworking and decided I'd buy
my materials from other players instead of gathering them myself.

"Buy your own leather? That's going to cost you a ton of money!", a
friend of mine said when I mentioned this plan to him. In some sense,
he was right -- I'd be spending a lot more money than if I gathered
the materials myself. What he was wrong about was that it would
actually *cost* me more to purchase all the materials.

A simple fact about WoW, and most RPGs, is that high-level characters
are dramatically more productive than low-level characters. Any amount
of monster slaying a low-level character can do, a high-level
character can do faster, and usually at scale. Even better, high-level
characters can access more valuable areas than low-level characters
can. By running endgame dungeons, high-level characters can earn
perhaps a dozen or so gold in an hour or two. Low-level characters can
earn perhaps a few dozen silver in that same time, literally 1/100th
the gold per hour.

To get high level leather, you need to level up Skinning high enough.
You need to start on low-level mobs and work your way up. **Any time I
spent farming low-level mobs to level up my skinning would have been
time I wasn't spending running dungeons.** Since higher-level players
need gathering materials, too (it wouldn't be strange for a level 25
character to buy some light leather for crafting purposes, even though
light leather is usually farmed from mobs in their mid-teens),
low-level players can make unusually high returns by selling their
gathered materials to other players. It's the same reason a cab driver
makes more in Manhattan than in Ahmedabad, India -- Manhattan drivers
can sell to richer customers.

So, I have two options: Run a dungeon for an hour, earning me
(conservatively) 8 gold, a bit of reputation with the Argent Dawn, and
a chance to get new, better pieces of gear. Light leather is ~70
pieces per gold, so let's just say I spend 3 gold to pick up roughly
210 pieces of light leather after the dungeon. Or, I can spend that
same hour farming leather, which would leave me with (say) 160 pieces
of light leather (if I'm really good at it!). After I've run the
dungeon and bought the leather, my yield for that time spent looks
like this:

| Resource Type | One Dungeon Run Yield | 1h Leather Farming Yield |
|---------------|-----------------------|--------------------------|
|Leather | 210 | 160 |
|Gold | 5 | 0 |
|Argent Dawn Reputation | 300 | 0|
|Avg New Equipment Pcs | 0.75 | 0|

If I come to you after playing an hour of WoW and say, "Look, I just
earned 160 light leather," you can conclude one of two things must
have happened:

1. I spent an hour farming light leather

Or,

2. I spent an hour doing a dungeon, then ran back to
	Ironforge and threw 5 gold, 50 pieces of leather, and maybe a
	new helmet into the lava pit in the middle of the city. Then,
	I ran to Light's Hope Chapel and loudly insinuated that I had
	relations with Tyrion Fordring's mother.

This is where opportunity cost gets its name -- effectively, we paid a
cost for spending our time doing one thing when we had a different,
more productive option available. It can all be summed up by something
a friend of mine in Gadgetzan used to say: "Time is money, friend."

Now, it may seem a little unfair to look only at one of the cheapest
forms of leather -- after all, eventually I'll be gathering more
valuable leather. This will supplement my dungeon income somewhat, on
some dungeons. But note that this has to be offset by the rather large
time investment on my part. If I run dungeons frequently, and the
money earned from gathering leather in those dungeons is high enough,
_and_ I play for a long time (I have a notoriously fickle
relationship with WoW), that will eventually start paying dividends!
But not only does it have to justify its cost, it has to justify its
cost _relative to every other option I have_. Further, it's hard
to imagine that farming even rather valuable leather would be a
justifiable expenditure of time, unless I'm someone who finds farming
enjoyable (which I definitely sometimes do!).

So, since I wanted to level Leatherworking but didn't want to invest
in Skinning (preferring to keep the slot open in case I find another
valuable profession), I kept running dungeons and bought the materials
myself. In fact, this was a much cheaper way to level up my
leatherworking -- I leveled it to 250 in a few days, and those were
days where I could only devote an hour or two to WoW. I would have
needed to commit much more time to it if I wanted to gather materials
myself, so it would have cost me several days before my leatherworking
would be at the level I needed it to be.

Before long after hitting 250 leatherworking, I turned a profit.
Conventional knowledge is that gathering professions earn you money,
but crafting professions are usually a money sink. This is definitely
true when leveling up -- you just can't make enough money on crafting
to make up the difference in selling your crafted items, but it's
usually pretty easy to do some gathering while you're questing. But I
chose leatherworking because I found a way to make good, consistent
money off if it. In a future post, I'll describe how I did that.
